---
layout: post
title: Merit does not exist
subtitle: An argument on why the idea of 'merit' in our society is based on flimsy foundations.  
---

Our society has tried to establish cultures and organizations which value merit. In fact, merit is often attributed as a virtue, people with merit must succeed and be better, people without merit should perish. However, on a piece by piece analysis, I had difficulty understanding what merit means and where does it stem from. Hence, I tried to decode and put my arguments on why we need a deeper look on what merit means and why, as it exists, merit is based on flimsy foundations.

Before we begin, let us define what merit means. I'll take the defition from [dictionary.com](https://www.dictionary.com/browse/merit)
> Merit: something that deserves or justifies a reward or commendation; a commendable quality, act, etc.

Basically, the idea of merit is highly based on someone deserving something. The girl got JEE Advance rank 1 out of her own merit. Only someone with merit must be made captain of the team. In India, a tea-seller can become the Prime Minister based on their own merit. You get the idea. 

However, the question is, what is the source of this merit? Is this merit gained through hardwork, certain skills, upbringing, culture or an innate quality? And should merit be attributed to an individual? If I come first in a race, am I the one who should deserve the prize, i.e., is it solely because of my merit that I won? These are the questions I intend to tackle.

To answer this, I'll be using the terms _IQ_ and _work_ a bit fluidly. We will simply divide the factors by which we can measure people's achievements into two things - things they had no control over (IQ), and things they did have control over(work). Their parents, their genetics, their cultures and other things would go into the section of _IQ_, and while their choices - them choosing studying over partying, them choosing the right study material etc would go into the section of _work_. Hence we can say, that people's achievements must be _proportional_ to **IQ x work**. 

Here comes the first folly of merit. A lot of our achievements are because of the multiplier that is our _IQ_, for ex, people born with good heights become good basketball players. Hence, when we say LeBron James is the best basketball player and hence he deserves all his records, we have to admit he was also born with an amazing height of 2.06 metres, something that he didn't have any role in. Hence, we are attributing merit to individuals when there is a strong multiplier of things that individual had no control over. That's like praising Prince George for being a prince, well, he didn't actually do anything there.

Then one might argue, that the differentiating factor is the _work_, i.e., what choices people make during their lifetime. One might again argue that LeBron James is the best basketballer because of his insane work ethic, because of him practicing hours on end and so on. But did he make those choices himself? He was born in a nation that plays basketball, had a foster family that pushed him to play basketball and again a lot of factors he didn't have control over. Ah, so we'd put all of this again in the section of _IQ_. But then again, what do we put in the section of _work_? It ultimately boils down to the free choices one makes, and the question of whether free choice exists. 

The free choice argument can easily be administered. If an individual, say A, is a blank slate while they are born, at the age of, say, 18 they'll simply be a product of their experiences. All the choices that they'll make will be because of what they experienced. Hence, if an identical (biological clone) individual B was swapped at birth with A, one can deduce that B's life will pan out the same way as A's. Hence if A can run 100 metres in 10 seconds, B will also run 100 metres in 10 seconds. Because B and A are identical, and they are blank slates, they'll just be a product of their environment, that is, their parents will treat them similarly, they will work similarly, they will have similar experiences and will grow similarly. There is no reason to believe B and A will grow up differently. Hence, if I put you in the biological body of LeBron James just swap you with him at birth, heck, you'd be the best basketballer in the world! Hence, there is no _work_, it's all a part of _IQ_. There is no free choice!

But, and this is a big but, are we blank slates at birth? This is a question which philosophers and scientists have a hard time answering, but for our purpose, it really is simple, if we are not blank slates then all that we get at birth is again put into _IQ_, we, the present conscious we, had no choice in selecting that.

With the above paragraphs, I try to hit home the fact that there is actually quite little that we control, and if you'll accept my no free choice argument, you'll agree that there isn't any _work_, it's all _IQ_. Whatever we are and we achieve, we have no control over it.

Coming back to what we started - merit. When we award people due to their merit, we intend to award their hard work, their deservedness. However, what we end up awarding is their _IQ_, things that they had no control over. That's like praising Prince George for being a prince, which is really stupid. Merit does not exist. What people achieve is not in their control and it is purely based on the circumstances they were in. Give anyone the same circumstances, and they would achieve the same things.

The final paragraph that I want to intend towards is the idea of a society based on meritocracy - people with merit should be given better things. However, just as we concluded merit does not exist, then what is meritocracy? Are we giving people better things just because of their circumstantial luck? Then meritocracy is simply taking a gold coin, drawing a random person and giving them the gold coin. I intend the reader to think why meritocracy is a false idea, it is based on merit and as we concluded, merit just doesn't exist. 

In the next post, I intend to argue that drawing a random person and giving them a gold coin is still fairer and more justifiable than meritocracy, but we'll get to that later.


