---
layout: post
title: Hierarchy: Oh the tragedy
subtitle: An opinion on why hierarchies are problematic.  
---

I’ll being with a definition - 
> Hierarchy - a system in which members of a society are ranked according to relative status or authority.

Now this hierarchy can be based on anything. In a capitalist society, it is based on the capital one possesses - whether inherited or accumulated. In the Indian society before the caste system was eradicated (debatable) it was based on one’s varna of birth. We can create a society in which hierarchy can be based on X, that X can be someone’s height, the language they speak, the color of the skin etc. In a modern day family, it is usually based on age and gender, and increasingly on the amount a family member makes (barr children, but then sometimes their potential money making capacity is evaluated.)

The question then arises, what benefits does someone get to be of a higher status? It depends, it usually is better allocation of resources and the authority over people who are below you. For example - the food is first served to the king, then his ministers, and at the last reaching to the peasant. The king can order anyone, the minister can order their subjects, the peasant can order no one. The modern day society is a mixture of plenty of such hierarchies which are often correlating and rarely contradictory - capitalist, patriarchal, racist/casteist and so on. The reason hierarchies are so prevalent is quite simple: the people at the top are always in the benefit and hence they use both propaganda and force to keep this hierarchy alive. Examples of propaganda being used - religion (the king has a divine right, it is written in the Vedas about your Dharma), hard work (the billionaires earned their worth), ‘natural tendencies’ (men are stronger, they protect women). Examples of use of force - White people beating black people for entering their neighbourhood, Brahmins/Kshatriyas beating Dalits for using their wells, men beating women for disobeying them, and a group of people beating a boy for stealing ‘their’ money. And while force can be used, propaganda is a stronger weapon. Because while you use force, you are at odds, the people at the top are smaller than the people at the bottom and hence you’ll eventually lose that war. However, propaganda is something different, because the people at the bottom are also convinced that this hierarchy is good and thus they keep their fellow low status people in check too. Long lasting hierarchies also have to give a promise that this hierarchy is fluid, for example - if you do your dharma, in the next birth you’ll be born to a higher varna, if you just work hard enough, you’ll also be rich. Good propaganda, a promise of elevation and occasional use of force to terrify the rebels, and you’ve got yourself a stable society. Occasionally, the people at the top would also sprinkle some charities to keep the people at the bottom supporting them, ex - Rich people donating, men ‘allowing’ their wives to work etc. 

Enough with explaining about hierarchy works. Let’s get to what I think of hierarchy. 
Firstly, I disagree that hierarchy just exists in nature. Hierarchy is a completely social and contextual concept. Note that differences exist, but the value that we attach to these differences is completely social and contextual. For example - a girl is tall. Now whether this is a good thing or a bad thing depends. If it is about a basketball game, it’s most likely a benefit; in a gymnastic setting, not so much. A man is strong and has huge muscles; again a benefit in arranging the furniture but probably not so good for helping a scared child. And hence in the ancient times and ancient context, being a male definitely might have helped, as males are usually taller, can pick up high hanging fruits and more such situations. Which might explain where patriarchy stems from. But our society has evolved and we don’t have such situations anymore. For example - the modern capitalist society has evaluated traders and CEOs more than doctors and policy makers, at their own peril. 

So the above paragraph might help you conclude that the present day hierarchies are a bit arbitrary and benefit only the ones at the top. So what now, let’s have a revolution and change the hierarchy to something else? Maybe based on people’s contribution to society? Good joke kiddo.

The problem with hierarchies is that whatever system one sets, be it based on race, capital, people’s contribution, the position at the top is so lucrative that once someone’s got a hold of that, nobody wants to give up that position. Look at French revolution to eliminate monarchy, or the Bolshevik revolution to eliminate capitalism, while they eliminated what they set out to but eventually established a hierarchy and started exploiting the people below. Because once you are at the top, you start rigging rules and try your best possible to keep yourself on top as long as possible. 

This is part of what I think I mean when I say hierarchies are illegitimate. Not that we should assign a higher value to a doctor as compared to a trader when it comes to saving lives but as soon as we assign this value, we let ourselves be exploited by the doctor in the longer run. The other part is that merit doesn’t exist, but that isn’t important in the scope of this essay.

Now let’s come to how an ideal society should be? One obvious running thought in your head while you were going through the above paragraphs might have been that it is only to save these kinds of exploitation that the laws exist doofus! Well, ideally yes, but because of the nature of hierarchy, the people at the top have no incentive to follow the law, except to avoid a revolution and hence instead of following the law, they start spreading propaganda and use force, ironically, inciting law. While I’m not completely denouncing that the society today is way better than ancient times, I’m claiming that as soon as you make anyone worthier than the rest, you allow them in the longer run to exploit. 

I have not come to a proper conception of how my ideal society would be. I do acknowledge that hierarchies are useful at times, for ex, I’ll rather be treated by a top surgeon than a medical student. However, how can one form a system so that these hierarchies don’t become exploitative, I’m not sure. The hierarchies have to be fluid in the true sense, not inheritable (like race and capital), serve the purpose of the society and should be constantly in check. Maybe having multiple contradictory hierarchies - for example the richer you are, the lesser your vote counts - will help to keep the power differential in check. And hierarchies should definitely be very very domain specific, not generalized like capitalism where money helps you get inside every door. One would be to let go of all hierarchies, an anarchists dream, but I’m not convinced how that would work as well. I’m still open to thought of how a world with no hierarchy or fixed hierarchy would work. But what I’m convinced on is that all the present day forms of hierarchy are illegitimate and lead to exploitation of the larger parts of the society. 



